---
title: 'From Idea to Execution: Writing a PRD That Works - Part 1'
draft: false
date: '2025-07-30'
summary: "An actionable guide to writing PRDs that actually drive execution. Covers what a PRD is, why it matters, and a practical structure: overview, problem, hypothesis, how we arrived (quant + qual + market + MVP), assumptions, and minimum criteria for success—setting you up for requirements and user stories in Part 2."
---

Welcome, Reader!

Thank you for visiting. This article distills what I’ve learned from
real-world experience—focused on practical advice that’s actually worked
for me. If you think writing a Product Requirements Document (PRD) is
easy, remember:

“Making something simple is hard. Simplicity is the result of a deep
understanding.”

My goal isn’t to lecture or waste your time; instead, I want to leave
you with a fresh, actionable perspective on PRDs. By the end of this
article, I hope you see PRDs— and their power to drive clarity— in a new
light.

Let’s dive in…

## What is PRD?

A PRD is a simple guide that explains what a product or feature should
do and why it matters. It covers the goals, key features, and how
everything is expected to work. This document helps different teams—like
developers, designers, testers, and business leaders—stay on the same
page and build the right thing, the right way.

In short, PRD is a blueprint that defines what a product should do,
outlining its purpose, features, functionality, and behaviour.

Next, I’ll walk you through each component of an effective PRD and
explain how it serves different stakeholders—engineering, design,
business, security, and more.

Keep in mind: there’s no one-size-fits-all formula. Product development
is inherently dynamic, and your PRD should continuously reflect new
learnings, changing requirements, and stakeholder feedback.

The key is to treat your PRD as a living document—regularly revisiting
and refining it to ensure clear alignment, communication, and successful
outcomes across the team.

## Key Components of PRD

A perfect PRD contains below mentioned sections,  
Topics covered here,

- Overview

- Problem Statement

- Hypothesis

- How did we arrive?

  - Quantitative analysis

  - Qualitative analysis

  - Market and Competitor analysis

  - MVP Analysis

- Assumptions

- Minimum Criteria for Success (MCS)

Topics covered in Part 2,

- User Stories

- Requirements

  - Functional

  - Non-Functional

  - Security / Compliance

  - Dependency

- Acceptance criteria

- Design/UX References

- Scope

- Out of Scope

- Mitigation plans

- Timeline

![PRD Framework](/static/images/prd-diagram.png)

## Overview

Think of the Overview as your quick ***elevator pitch*** for the PRD.
Instead of just “summarising what the document is about,” this is your
chance to hook the reader—especially leaders or busy folks who might
only read this section!

Keep it simple, punchy, and straight to the point. Highlight what
problem you’re solving, what you’re proposing, and why it matters. If
you were chatting with someone in the hallway and had only 30seconds to
explain the project, what would you say? That’s the energy you want
here.

Bottom line: This section sets the tone for the whole PRD—make it count,
but don’t overthink it. Just be clear, confident, and let your
excitement for the idea show!

## Problem Statement

This is where you spell out exactly what problem you’re solving—not just
in theory, but with real numbers whenever possible. Don’t just write in
broad strokes; dig in and use data to make your case.

Try to answer:

- What’s happening right now that isn’t working?

- Who is affected, and how big is the pain point?

- Can you tie it to actual metrics—lost revenue, customer complaints,
  time wasted, security incidents, or anything else measurable?

For example:

Instead of: “Users find onboarding confusing.”

Try: “x% of new users drop off before finishing onboarding”

Bringing in concrete stats doesn’t just make your problem statement
stronger—it shows you’ve done your homework and helps anyone reading
your PRD immediately understand *why* this is worth tackling.

Bottom line: Avoid vague theory. Be specific, be honest, and back up
your claims with real evidence whenever you can.

## Hypothesis

Hypothesis is a one-liner that acts a tool to align stakeholders with
your decision. Below mentioned is my sample template,

**We believe that** \<action\> **will result in** \<reaction\>
**because** \<reason\>.

Example

**We believe that** simplifying the onboarding flow by reducing the
number of steps from 7 to 4 **will result in** increase the onboarding
completion rate by 15% **because** users currently drop off due to the
lengthy process.

Why This Matters

A clear hypothesis helps:

- Align stakeholders on what you’re testing

- Define success metrics upfront

- Focus development on the most impactful changes

- Set expectations realistically

## How did we arrive?

This is your chance to explain the thinking and evidence that led you to
the hypothesis. Instead of just jumping to what you believe, walk the
reader through the data, feedback, or patterns you uncovered along the
way.

Bottom line:Sharing the “how” behind your reasoning sets the stage for
everyone to understand and buy into the decisions you’re making.

### Quantitative analysis

This is where you get to roll up your sleeves and dig into the numbers.
In this section, your goal is to analyze real data—user metrics,
patterns, or trends—to back up your hypothesis with hard evidence.

Example:

Analysis of the last 90 days shows only 47% of users completed
onboarding, compared to an industry average of 66%. Digging deeper, we
found that users who interacted with our help widget were 35% more
likely to finish onboarding, suggesting targeted assistance helps reduce
friction.

Why this matters:

- Provides objective, data-driven support for your recommendations (not
  just opinions).

- Helps stakeholders see the scale and urgency of the problem.

- Makes your hypothesis more credible and your next steps easier to
  justify.

Bottom line:Don’t just tell a story, show it with numbers.

### Qualitative Analysis

While quantitative analysis helps drive decisions through data and
numbers, qualitative analysis offers a different and equally valuable
perspective. As a Product Manager, it's essential to step into the
customer’s shoes to truly understand their problems—this insight often
guides more empathetic and effective decision-making.

Keep in mind that not all users experience a feature in the same way.
For instance, the UX of an onboarding page might feel intuitive to
someone in their early 20s but confusing to a user in their late 30s.
It’s your responsibility as a PM to identify these patterns and bring
them to light.

Example:

Interviews with new users showed that while younger participants found
onboarding intuitive, older users described it as “confusing” and “too
fast-paced,” with many unsure about next steps. Support chats echoed
this, with older users requesting more guidance and clarity.

This is where qualitative analysis becomes critical. A successful PM
stays approachable and consistently connected to users, actively
listening to their pain points to uncover nuanced insights that
quantitative data alone can't reveal.

Why it matters:

- Brings empathy into your decision-making—helps you build products *for
  real people*, not just profiles.

- Surfaces blind spots in user experience that numbers can miss.

- Encourages solutions that are inclusive and resonate across your whole
  user base.

- Builds stronger relationships with your customers and more trust
  within your team.

Bottom line:As a PM, your job isn’t just to crunch data—it’s to connect
with your users and ensure their voices shape your product decisions.

### Market and Competitor analysis

“Timing and location aren’t luck; they’re the quiet rewards of
preparation.”

This section is where you show you’ve done the homework beyond just
building a feature—you understand *who* the customer is, *where* the
market is headed, and exactly *why* now is the moment for your solution.

Why it Matters:

- Launching at the right time and to the right audience can be the
  difference between breakout success and falling flat.

- Staying aware of competitors helps you avoid blind spots and find
  opportunities for differentiation.

- Understanding your market ensures you build not just what users *say*
  they want, but what the broader landscape actually *needs* (and will
  pay for).

Tips for a Strong Section:

- Use a table or chart for quick-read competitor comparisons

- Highlight gaps in the market that only you address

Bottom line:This is your chance to prove you’re not just building in a
vacuum.

### MVP Analysis

This section gives you an optional but powerful chance to share what
happened if you’ve already built a Minimal Viable Product (MVP) or early
prototype. If you have data, attach your MVP analysis docs and summarize
the key results right here.

What to cover:

- MVP Outcomes: How did your MVP perform? Include real-world feedback,
  usage metrics, customer reactions, and any unexpected results.

- Success? Build on It: If your MVP hit its targets, use the learnings,
  validated features, and positive data to guide (and justify) which
  requirements become part of the main PRD. Call out what worked and
  why—this forms a strong foundation for the rest of your plan.

- Failure? Celebrate Learning: If the MVP didn’t deliver as hoped, be
  open about it! Highlight what you discovered—pain points, missing
  value, technical or UX flaws, or even misalignment with user needs.
  Spell out the lessons learned, how those learnings shift your
  priorities, and what you’ll do differently in the full product.

Why it matters:

- Demonstrates you’re using real evidence to guide product direction—not
  just building on assumptions.

- Shows you’re learning from both wins and misses.

- Establishes credibility and sets a transparent, iterative tone for the
  rest of your PRD.

Bottom line:If you’ve run an MVP, let the data and learnings guide your
next steps.

## Assumptions

This is where you outline what you’re taking as *given*—the things you
believe to be true as you move toward your solution. Listing your key
assumptions upfront doesn’t just increase transparency with
stakeholders—it shows that you’ve thought about “unknowns” and are
purposeful (not just guessing) about how you plan.

How to make your Assumptions section strong:

- List each key assumption: Spell out the market, technical, user, or
  process beliefs that drive your decisions.

- Explain your reasoning: Briefly state *why* you think each assumption
  is valid. Did user research, analytics, industry best practices, or
  past experience shape your view?

- Tie to impact: Where possible, connect assumptions to possible risks
  if they prove wrong—and how you’ll address that.

Why this matters:

- Makes your thinking visible—which builds trust and prevents surprise
  disagreements later.

- Flags which ideas *need to be validated* as the project progresses.

- Gives everyone a head start for risk planning and prioritizing early
  validation.

Bottom line:Being open about your assumptions—and your logic—gives your
PRD more credibility and helps everyone get on the same page, right from
the start.

## Minimum Criteria for Success (MCS)

"Success isn’t just reaching the goal—it’s knowing what goal is worth
reaching."

This section is absolutely key. Without clear success criteria, nobody
knows what “winning” actually looks like—and that makes it tough to
align teams, measure progress, or celebrate real achievements. MCS draws
the line in the sand: “If we hit these targets, we know the product or
feature delivered value.”

Bottom line:Set your MCS before you start building and be honest about
whether your product or feature is truly working.

So far, we've covered how a Product Manager engages with leadership,
marketing, and fellow PMs. In the next part, we'll focus on sections
what a PM should communicate to designers, engineers, and QA teams.
