---
title: 'Why Porkbun is Winning: The Amul Analogy'
draft: false
date: '2025-08-16'
summary: "An exploration of how Porkbun's success mirrors Amul's winning strategy: transparency, community connection, memorable branding, and authentic value. Two very different companies, one powerful business lesson about putting people first."
---

When I first decided to buy a domain for my website, I started exploring
different domain service providers. That's when I came across something
interesting---a lot of positive buzz around a company named Porkbun. The
name itself was quirky and memorable, but what really caught my
attention was how much people loved their transparent pricing and
friendly service. I even saw a lot of positive responses and
recommendations on Reddit from users praising Porkbun for its simplicity
and honesty. As I dug deeper, something unexpected happened. It reminded
me of another brand I knew well---**Amul**.

At first glance, it's hard to imagine what a small domain registrar in
Oregon and one of India's biggest dairy brands could possibly have in
common. Porkbun deals with websites and domains, while Amul sells butter
and milk. But if you look closer, these two very different companies
have a lot in common in the way they think about business and their
customers.

![Porkbun vs Amul Comparison](/static/images/porkbun-main.png)

## Both Startups at Heart

Amul started as a humble cooperative in a small village in Gujarat,
India, with the goal of empowering local farmers. Porkbun began more
recently as a fresh face in the sometimes complicated world of internet
domains. Both began by solving a simple but important problem: Amul
wanted to create fair prices and better products for farmers and
consumers. Porkbun wanted to offer affordable, transparent domain
registration without the hassles and sneaky fees other registrars often
use.

Despite their differences in time and industry, both companies share the
heart of a startup: focusing on **making things better for the people
they serve** rather than just trying to maximize profits.

## Transparency and Trust Win the Day

One thing both Amul and Porkbun deeply understand is that **people want
to feel they can trust the brand they buy from**. Amul has
revolutionized the Indian dairy market by building a cooperative system
where farmers, not big corporations, own the brand. This has created a
transparent process where everyone benefits. Customers know their butter
or milk is coming from people who are fairly treated, and farmers know
they get a fair price.

Similarly, Porkbun has become a favorite among developers and website
owners because of its **clear, upfront pricing**. No confusing discounts
that jump at renewal, no hidden costs---just straightforward fees that
don't change. This honesty has earned Porkbun a loyal following in the
tech community, much like how Amul earns loyalty from millions of Indian
families.

## Strong Community Connections

Both Amul and Porkbun use memorable mascots to humanize their brands and
connect with customers. Amul's cheerful **"Amul Girl"** in her polka-dot
dress has been a beloved symbol in India for decades, known for
delivering witty, timely commentary on social and political events that
keeps the brand relevant and relatable. Similarly, Porkbun's playful
**pig mascot** brings a sense of humor and approachability to the often
technical and dry domain registrar industry, making the process of
buying domains feel friendly and less intimidating. These mascots give
both brands a unique personality, helping them stand out and create an
emotional bond with their audiences.

## Keeping it Simple, Keeping it Real

Neither Amul nor Porkbun rely on flashy advertising or gimmicks. They
keep their offerings simple and true to what their customers need. Amul
controls its supply chain to ensure quality and affordability, while
Porkbun focuses on transparent pricing and essential features without
trying to upsell unnecessary extras.

![Porkbun Website Screenshot](/static/images/porkbun-screenshot.png)

The above image is a screenshot from Porkbun's website, demonstrating
how Porkbun uses humor and a friendly tone to connect with people.
Instead of dry legal language, Porkbun asks for email consent by saying
"Now We're Going To Beg \*," followed by playful descriptions and
response options like "Yes. Send me your awesome emails :)" or "No. I
don't want your awesome emails :(." This lighthearted, conversational
approach helps Porkbun stand out and makes their brand feel approachable
and human---much like how Amul's iconic advertising uses wit and charm
to build emotional bonds with customers.

This simplicity has helped both brands grow steadily and sustainably.
Customers feel they are getting genuine value without the noise or
confusion---something that builds lasting trust.

In the end, Porkbun and Amul are both brands with a **deep respect for
their communities, a commitment to honesty, and a focus on real value**.
Different worlds, sure, but when it comes to business strategy, they
remind us that authenticity and putting people first are always the
smartest moves.

And here's the kicker: after all that excitement about Porkbun's
friendly vibe and transparent pricing, I hit a little roadblock---the ID
verification process! Apparently, Porkbun now asks for government ID to
keep things safe and prevent fraud. So, despite all the good vibes from
Reddit and the fun experience, I couldn't quite complete the purchase.
Guess I'll have to keep hunting\... or maybe take my ID on a little
adventure first! ðŸ˜Š
